So here is the structure of a status report that I
recommend; I also call it my 3 P's as well.
Whenever you're writing a status report,
always answer at least one key question: where is the project now?
People want to know what's going on.
To answer that, we must look at both the past,
present, and future,
because any status report is built with the following three categories.
Progress.
That's really the past.
What has been achieved since the last time I wrote this status report?
The next would be the plans.
What's the future?
What are our goals and objectives that are coming up in the future,
typically in the next period?
So if I'm writing weekly status reports,
the progress was from the last week and the plans will
be for this next week coming up.
And also, problems.
We always want to highlight issues and problems.
I know that sounds counter-intuitive.
We don't want to hide anything; we want to open and ethical.
So what challenges have we encountered?
And these are items that might be stuck or can't be finished.
Problems often need help from someone else,
not just the employees as your teammates.
So you're going to maybe want to reach out in the status report.
Hey,
here are some issues; I'm reaching back out to the
infrastructure group; I'm reaching back out to the
IT/security group to kind of get over some hurdles.
So that's really it.
I just call it the 3 P's.
That's the basis for the simplest and most common status
report on which all variations are based on.
Okay, so we can kind of give these little nicknames as well.
So the first on progress is what's been done?
What do we have to do that's coming up in the next reporting period?
And lastly, what are the open issues?
It's still the same thing.
Now you can always add more categories to the three
here; no problem at all with that.
In software development for example, you could list,
well here are some proposed features that came out of a scrum.
Here's an additional backlog of items that I need people's input on,
or maybe there is some customer feedback.
Again,
feel free to get creative so you can put the best
status report you can together,
but I would still recommend that you have at least these
three core items and then add to those.
Okay, now let's see how we'd actually put one together.
Here's an example.
Here are some basic mechanics of writing your status reports.
The preferred length for a status report is about 5 to 7 items per category.
Those categories are what we just talked about: progress,
plan, issues, and if you add others categories.
We just don't want that status report too long.
If it's too long, it won't be read, but again, be flexible and be creative.
If you need to put 9, you put 9 and if you put 3, you put 3.
Okay, next.
When adding items, keep something mind.
Write everything thinking of how others,
the readers, may understand it; you're not writing for yourself.
Next, use sentences that follow the 5 C's, of course.
Don't use just one or two words here and there.
Use longer sentences, provide commentary and background.
You're trying to provide good, timely, informative information.
Also, make sure it's easy to understand.
Always think, if your customer,
manager or coworkers will understand and learn
something from what you've written, then that's great.
That's what you want.
You want information to be conveyed.
So good wording is a key to successful status reporting.
Of course, you'll want to send regularly.
Regularity is a good status reporting practice and always on time.
If it's Monday morning to your manager, it's Monday morning.
If it's Wednesday afternoon to a certain customer,
it's always Wednesday afternoon, so they can expect to receive it.
Next, decide what is that regular cycle?
You know, we'd all go crazy if we had to write, you know, daily status reports?
Quarterly?
Well, maybe that's a little too long, too.
So, in general, I like weekly or monthly.
That seems to be the best paradigm.
But again,
be creative and determine what your customer or the recipient would like.
So don't just guess at what you think the timeliness or regularity may be,
actually call up the customer.
Hey, I'm thinking of giving you a status report once a week.
Great!
They might say once a month is plenty.
So find out from your customers or your manager what the
timeliness of that status report should be.
And always keep a copy for your records.
This could come in very handy when looking back over time,
wondering well, what did my team do over the last six months?
The status reports have a wealth of information that you can draw
from for performance reviews or reminding your manager or your
customers of all the work that you've done.
It's a great way to document that.
Okay, well, here's a tip.
I'd like you never to use bullets and I want you always to use numbered lists,
also known as ordered lists, in each of your categories such as progress,
plan and problems or other categories and here is why.
Someone calls you on the phone and says, hey, thanks for the status report.
I've got a question about the progress area and it's,
oh, well wait a minute--one, two, three,
I think it's the fourth bullet down.
That's a waste of time and that's silly.
So I always want you to use numbered lists so it's 1,
2, 3, 4, 5 and maybe under 2 it's 2b, etc.
That way, someone can call or reply to your email and say hey,
I've got a question about your future plans,
it's item 3c and here's my question.
So it's very clear, it's very concise, and it's very understandable.
Alright, great.
Now let's move on and I'll actually show you an example
of creating a real-live status report.
Now here is a very simple example.
We're going to start with the status report title: Status
Report--POLAR Phase 5 Activity for 9/28/2015.
So that's the title of our status report.
Now I've added a new first section.
I like one called Logistics.
For example, Michael will be out of the office,
John will be acting as the meeting leader,
and he can be reached at phone number and email.
So sometimes logistics is great.
It might talk about holidays coming up, vacations,
new people coming onto projects, etc.
It's just basic housekeeping.
Now I get into the 3 P's.
So progress.
Progress for when?
I put the date range.
We identified and resolved the file upload issue.
I don't go into all the details on how it got fixed; I
just want to say that it's been resolved.
If someone has a question, they can reply and say hey,
item 2a, I have a question, how did you actually resolve that?
That might be of interest.
The next progress item,
completed 50% of the LDAP integration to enable users to
sign in using Active Directory accounts.
So that's another item that we have had progress on,
but obviously, it's still in work.
Alright, now let me go to the next page here and continue this simple example.
We are now continuing a simple example of a status report.
Okay, the next piece would be plans.
So for plans, I put the date range in the future,
of course,
and here are the things that our team is planning to do for the polar project.
We're going to complete the LDAP/AD integration and we're
going to perform an end-to-end test cycle for the file
upload issue that we solved.
We solved it in the last cycle,
but we did not actually do the full end-to-end test.
And lastly, I'm going to list my problems.
Discovered an issue with the audit log tracking database
permissions in the production environment.
I've got an action here, assigned to John for analysis.
I don't even know how this problem might be resolved,
but I've identified the problem, etc.
You will list your problems here,
maybe more in the plans and more in the progress that we did before,
but again, this is just a very simple status report.
Alright,
now let's move on to the next piece in which I'm just
going to show you some really simple, good,
general practices for status reporting.
Let me summarize some general rules of thumb for writing status reports.
Keep it short and simple.
Managers are busy people who don't have a lot of time to read.
If your managers wants the details,
they will ask; if your customer wants the details,
they will ask.
If you have many of the same sorts of things to track: bug lists,
change orders, work orders,
etc., a spreadsheet or database might be an easier way to
keep tabs on all that kind of work,
but those details should only be referenced with a
document name or a URL or an attachment.
Don't dump a lot of details into a status report.
Keep it clean.
Also, be specific.
Keep copies of your status reports for your own reference.
If you are using email to send them out,
of course, email systems can keep your sent file so that's great.
Your archive of status reports could help you write a resume or list
accomplishments when it comes time for an employee review.
Either for you or if you're having your team members write them for you.
Write and send regularly.
We mentioned this, but I will again; it's that important.
If you plan to write status reports,
write the regularly or at least keep a running list of accomplishments,
so you don't spend hours tracking down what you have done.
Keep the report positive, if possible.
This is not a place to complain or editorialize or make excuses.
One good way to do this is to suggest a solution or at least a
direction to explore if you have a problem to report.
That will show that you have initiative.
If you do have serious issues,
just go in and talk to your boss or your customer in person.
Now I'm not suggesting sugar-coating your status report.
Not at all.
Always and I mean always be open and honest and
bring any important issues to light.
Just don't be a complainer or a blamer.
Be professional.
Follow the 5 C's.
And give credit where credit is due.
Thank a coworker, customer,
or external vendor for all the help maybe with a difficult task.
If you've helped somebody else, say so.
That's really good.
Give credit where credit is due. Now let's move on to the next section on writing creative emails.